= System Metrics

System Metrics is a Rails 3 Engine that provides a clean web interface to the performance metrics instrumented with `ActiveSupport::Notifications`. It'll collect and display the notifications baked into Rails and any additional custom ones you add using `ActiveSupport::Notification#instrument`.

= Installation

To install the System Metrics gem in your Rails 3 app, add the following line to your Gemfile

    gem 'system-metrics'

You'll then need to move the System Metrics migration into your project and run it.

    rails generate system_metrics:migration
    rake db:migrate

Lastly, the public assets from the System Metrics gem need to be moved into your app

    rails generate system_metrics:install

= Setup

Out of the box, System Metrics collects the more interesting performance notifications built into Rails with no configuration. However, there are a few options available to fine tune it and add your own instrumentations.

== Path Exclusion Patterns

You can append patterns to the `path_exclude_patterns` setting if there are URLs you don't care to collect metrics about.

    # config/application.rb
    config.system_metrics.path_exclude_patterns << /^\/admin/

Adding the `/^\/admin/` exclusion pattern will ensure that no metrics are collected for any path beginning with `/admin`.

== Notification Exclusion Patterns

You can append patterns to the `notification_exclude_patterns` setting if you notice metrics in the System Metrics interface that you don't care about. The patterns are matched against the `ActiveSupport::Notifications::Event#name`.

    # config/application.rb
    config.system_metrics.notification_exclude_patterns << /annoying$/

Adding the `/annoying$/` exclusion pattern will prevent notifications whose name ends with `annoying` from being collected by System Metrics.

== Instruments

Instruments are responsible for the decision to collect a notification as a metric and processing it before storage. By default, system metrics add instruments for ActionController, ActionMailer, ActionView, ActiveRecord, and a high level Rack request. However, you can easily add additional instruments to the configuration.

    # config/application.rb
    config.system_metrics.instruments << MyCustomInstrument.new

= Custom Instruments

By default, System Metrics will collect all notifications it has not been specifically configured not to collect. Therefore, simply adding ActiveSupport::Notifications#instrument calls to your code is normally good enough. System Metrics will just start collecting these new notifications. However, if you'd like to modify the notification event payloads or be more selective about which types of notifications get collected, you'll want to write a custom instrument.

Instrument implementations require three methods, #handles?(event), #ignore?(event), and #process(event). If your needs are fairly simple, you may be able to extend SystemMetrics::Instrument::Base. Check its RDoc for details.

Below is a custom instrument for timing Sunspot searches:

    class SunspotInstrument
      def handles?(event)
        event.name =~ /sunspot$/
      end
      
      def ignore?(event)
        User.current.admin?
      end
      
      def process(event)
        event.payload[:user] = User.current.name
      end
    end

This example instrument illustrates three concepts

(1) It will handle any event whose name ends with sunspot.
(2) It will inform SystemMetrics that the event should not be collected if the current user is an administrator.
(3) It will add the current user's name to the event payload

= Authorization

There's no authorization built into SystemMetrics, although it should be rather straightforward to add your own. Consider the following example implementation:

    # config/initializers/system_metrics_authorization.rb
    module SystemMetricsAuthorization
      def self.included(base)
        base.send(:before_filter, :authorize)
      end
      
      def authorize
        # Do you authorization thing
      end
    end

    SystemMetrics::MetricsController.send(:include, SystemMetricsAuthorization)

= Caveats

I would not currently recommend using SystemMetrics in a production environment. There are far too many synchronous database inserts of the collected metrics to confidently say that it wouldn't impact your application's performance.

= Credits

The idea behind System Metrics and the inspiration for a good portion of its code comes from José Valim's Rails Metrics project. The inspiration for the user interface comes from Greg Bell's ActiveAdmin project.

= License

System Metrics is released under the MIT license.

Copyright (c) 2011 Near Infinity. http://www.nearinfinity.com
